Scalability testing docs (#39171)
cilium-team/cilium: Documentation/contributing/testing/scalability.rst

.. only:: not (epub or latex or html)

    WARNING: You are looking at unreleased Cilium documentation.
    Please use the official rendered version released here:
    https://docs.cilium.io

.. _scalability_testing:

Scalability and Performance Testing
===================================

Introduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Cilium scalability and performance tests leverage `ClusterLoader2 <CL2_>`_.
For overview of ClusterLoader2, please refer to the `Readme <CL2_README_>`_ and `Getting Started <CL2_GETTING_STARTED_>`_.
At a high level, ClusterLoader2 allows for specifying states of the cluster, how to transition between them
and what metrics to measure during the test run.

> Additionally, It allows for failing the test if the metrics are not within the expected thresholds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, it allows for failing the test if the metrics are not within the expected thresholds.
```

Overview of existing tests
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Tests based on kOps and GCP VMs:

* 100 nodes scale test - ``/scale-100`` `Workflow <SCALE_100_WORKFLOW_>`_ that executes two test scenarios:

    * `Upstream load test <UPSTREAM_LOAD_TEST_>`_

    * `Network policy scale test <NETPOL_SCALE_TEST_>`_

* FQDN performance test - ``/fqdn-perf`` `Workflow <FQDN_PERF_WORKFLOW_>`_

>   a simple two-node test that deploys pods with FQDN policies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  is a simple two-node test that deploys pods with FQDN policies
```

  and measures the time it takes to resolve FQDNs from client point of view.

* ClusterMesh scale test - ``/scale-clustermesh`` `Workflow <CLUSTERMESH_WORKFLOW_>`_ leverages
  a `mock Clustermesh control-plane <CLUSTERMESH_MOCK_>`_ that simulates large deployments of ClusterMesh.

Test based on EKS:

* Egress Gateway scale test - ``/scale-egw``. `Workflow <EGW_WORKFLOW_>`_ tests Egress Gateway on a small cluster,
  but with synthetically created Endpoints and Nodes to simulate large cluster.

> Whenever developing new tests, you should consider if you want to add a test to already existing workflow,
> create a new one or maybe extend the existing test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever developing new tests, consider if you want to add a test to an already existing workflow,
create a new one, or extend some existing test.
```

If you are unsure, you can always ask in the ``#sig-scalabilty`` `Slack channel <SLACK_CHANNEL_>`_.
For example, if you want to run test on a large cluster,

> you might consider adding it as a separate test scenario to already existing 100 nodes scale test
> to reduce cost of CI, as spinning up a new cluster and tearing it down is quite a long process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you might consider adding it as a separate test scenario to the already existing 100-nodes scale test
to reduce the cost of CI, because spinning up a new cluster and tearing it down is quite a long process.
```

> For some use-cases, it might be better to simulate large cluster and execute test on a small cluster,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For some use-cases, it might be better to only simulate a large cluster but execute the test on a small cluster,
```

Author: changed ordering to "to simulate only"

like in the case of Egress Gateway scale test or ClusterMesh scale test.

Running CL2 tests locally
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Each CL2 test should be designed in a way that it scales with number of nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each CL2 test should be designed in a way that it scales with the number of nodes.
```

> This allows for running specific test case scenario in a local environment, to validate the test case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows for running a specific test case scenario in a local environment, to validate the test case.
```

> For example, let's run network policy scale test in local kind cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, let's run the network policy scale test in a local Kind cluster.
```

> First, setup a kind cluster with Cilium as documented in :ref:`dev_env`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, setup a Kind cluster with Cilium, as documented in :ref:`dev_env`.
```

> Build ClusterLoader2 binary from `perf-tests repository <CL2_>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Build the ClusterLoader2 binary from the `perf-tests repository <CL2_>`_.
```

.. code-block:: bash

    export CL2_PROMETHEUS_PVC_ENABLED=false
    export CL2_PROMETHEUS_SCRAPE_CILIUM_OPERATOR=true
    export CL2_PROMETHEUS_SCRAPE_CILIUM_AGENT=true
    export CL2_PROMETHEUS_SCRAPE_CILIUM_AGENT_INTERVAL=5s

    ./clusterloader \
    -v=2 \
    --testconfig=.github/actions/cl2-modules/netpol/config.yaml \
    --provider=kind \
    --enable-prometheus-server \
    --nodes=1 \
    --report-dir=./report \
    --prometheus-scrape-kube-proxy=false \
    --prometheus-apiserver-scrape-port=6443 \
    --kubeconfig=$HOME/.kube/config

Some additional options worth mentioning are:

* ``--tear-down-prometheus-server=false`` - Leaves Prometheus and Grafana running after the test finishes, this helps with speeding up the test run
  when running multiple tests in a row, but also for exploring the metrics in Grafana.
* ``--experimental-prometheus-snapshot-to-report-dir=true`` - Creates a snapshot of the Prometheus data and saves it to the report directory

By setting ``deleteAutomanagedNamespaces: false`` in the test config, you can also leave
the test namespaces after the test finishes. This is especially useful for checking if your test
created the expected resources.

> At the end of output, test should end successfully with:
> 
> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer: This is no bash code. Note the double-colon at the end of the line, to open the preformatted block.

```suggestion
At the end of output, the test should end successfully with::
```

    clusterloader.go:252] --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    clusterloader.go:253] Test Finished
    clusterloader.go:254]   Test: .github/actions/cl2-modules/netpol/config.yaml
    clusterloader.go:255]   Status: Success
    clusterloader.go:259] --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

All the test results are saved in the report directory, ``./report`` in this case.
Most importantly, it contains:

* ``generatedConfig_netpol.yaml`` - Rendered test scenario

> * ``'GenericPrometheusQuery NetPol Average CPU Usage_netpol_.*.json'`` - ``GenericPrometheusQuery`` test results contain results of the prometheus queries executed during test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``'GenericPrometheusQuery NetPol Average CPU Usage_netpol_.*.json'`` - ``GenericPrometheusQuery`` test results contain results of the Prometheus queries executed during test.
```

  In this example, it contains CPU usage of the Cilium agents. All of the Prometheus Queries will be automatically
  visualized in :ref:`perfdash <perfdashdocs>`.

> * ``'PodPeriodicCommand.*Profiles-stdout.*'`` - Contains memory and CPU profiles gathered during the test run. To see how to read them, please refer to the :ref:`profiling`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``'PodPeriodicCommand.*Profiles-stdout.*'`` - Contains memory and CPU profiles gathered during the test run. To understand how to interpret them, refer to the :ref:`profiling` subsection.
```

Then you need to pass it as additional argument to ClusterLoader2:

.. code-block:: bash

    ./clusterloader \
    --prometheus-additional-monitors-path=../../.github/actions/cl2-modules/egw/prom-extra-podmons
    ...

Now you can use the additional metrics in your test, by leveraging regular ``GenericPrometheusQuery`` measurement.
For example, Egress Gateway ensures that various percentiles of masquerade latency observed by client are
`below specific thresholds <EGW_MASQ_METRICS_>`_. This can be achieved by following measurement in ClusterLoader2:

.. code-block:: yaml

  - Identifier: MasqueradeDelay{{ .metricsSuffix }}
    Method: GenericPrometheusQuery
    Params:
      action: {{ .action }}
      metricName: Masquerade Delay {{ .metricsSuffix }}
      metricVersion: v1
      unit: s
      enableViolations: true
      queries:
      - name: P95
        query: quantile(0.95, egw_scale_test_masquerade_delay_seconds_total{k8s_instance="{{ .instance }}"})
        threshold: {{ $MASQ_DELAY_THRESHOLD }}

Running tests in CI
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once you are happy with the test and validated it locally, you can create a PR with the test.

> You can base your Github workflow on the existing tests, or add test scenario to already existing workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can base your Github workflow on the existing tests, or add a test scenario to an already existing workflow.
```

Accessing test results from PR or CI runs
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

> You can run the specific scalability or performance test in your PR, some example commands are:
> 
> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer: Not bash

```suggestion
You can run the specific scalability or performance test in your PR, some example commands are::
```

    /scale-100
    /scale-clustermesh
    /scale-egw
    /fqdn-perf

> After test run, all of the results will be saved in GS bucket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the test run, all of the results will be saved in GS bucket.
```

Please expand GS - do you mean Google Cloud Storage?

Author: yes, done.

In workflow run, you will see a link to the test results, for example in `test run <TEST_RUN_>`_:

> .. code-block:: bash
> 
>     EXPORT_DIR: gs://cilium-scale-results/logs/scale-100-main/1745287079

Reviewer: Not bash

```suggestion
::

    EXPORT_DIR: gs://cilium-scale-results/logs/scale-100-main/1745287079
```

To see how to install gsutil check `Install gsutil <GSUTIL_INSTALL>`_ section.
To see the results, you can run:

.. code-block:: bash

    gsutil ls -r gs://cilium-scale-results/logs/scale-100-main/1745287079

You can also copy results to your local machine by running:

.. code-block:: bash

    gsutil -m cp -r gs://cilium-scale-results/logs/scale-100-main/1745287079 .

.. _perfdashdocs:

Visualizing results in Perfdash
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Perfdash leverages exported results from ClusterLoader2 and visualizes them.
Currently, we do not host publicly available instance of Perfdash.
To visualize the results, please check the `Scaffoling repository <PERFDASH_>`_.

> As an example, you can check how average CPU usage of the Cilium agent changed recently:

Reviewer: Please remove “changed recently”, this is only valid as of your writing, not in months or years from now when readers take a look at the docs.

.. image:: /images/perfdash.png
    :align: center

> Note that you can click on the graph and it will redirect you to Google Storage containing all of the results
> for specific test run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that clicking on the graph redirects you to the Google Cloud Storage page containing all of the results
for the specific test run.
```

Accessing Prometheus snapshot
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Each test run creates a snapshot of the Prometheus data and saves it to the report directory.
This is enabled by setting ``--experimental-prometheus-snapshot-to-report-dir=true``.
Prometheus snapshots help with debugging, give a good overview of the cluster state
during test run and can be used to further improve alerting in CI based on existing metrics.

> For example, snapshot can be found in directory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a snapshot can be found in directory
```

``gs://cilium-scale-results/logs/scale-100-main/1745287079/artifacts/prometheus_snapshot.tar.gz``.
You need to extract it and run Prometheus locally:

> .. code-block:: bash

Reviewer: When mixing commands and their prompt symbols with output, the language you want is `console`.

```suggestion
.. code-block:: console
```

    prometheus/snapshots/20250422T013829Z-3ee723086c84c32a/01JSDJB32JAM1FQ6SN8ESFNDN0/
    prometheus/snapshots/20250422T013829Z-3ee723086c84c32a/01JSDJB32JAM1FQ6SN8ESFNDN0/meta.json
    prometheus/snapshots/20250422T013829Z-3ee723086c84c32a/01JSDJB32JAM1FQ6SN8ESFNDN0/tombstones
    prometheus/snapshots/20250422T013829Z-3ee723086c84c32a/01JSDJB32JAM1FQ6SN8ESFNDN0/index
    prometheus/snapshots/20250422T013829Z-3ee723086c84c32a/01JSDJB32JAM1FQ6SN8ESFNDN0/chunks/
    prometheus/snapshots/20250422T013829Z-3ee723086c84c32a/01JSDJB32JAM1FQ6SN8ESFNDN0/chunks/000001

    $ prometheus --storage.tsdb.path=./prometheus/snapshots/20250422T013829Z-3ee723086c84c32a/ --web.listen-address="0.0.0.0:9092"

To visualize the data, you can run Grafana locally and connect it to the Prometheus instance.

.. _profiling:

Accessing CPU and memory profiles
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

All of the scalability tests collect CPU and memory profiles.
They are collected under file names like ``PodPeriodicCommand.*Profiles-stdout.*``.
Each profile is taken periodically during the test run.
Simplest way to visualize them is to leverage `pprof-merge <PPROF_MERGE_>`_.

> Example commands to aggregate CPU and memory profiles from whole test run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example commands to aggregate CPU and memory profiles from the whole test run:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    gsutil -m cp gs://cilium-scale-results/logs/scale-100-main/1745287079/artifacts/PodPeriodicCommand*Profiles-stdout* ./
    for file in *.txt; do mv "$file" "${file%.txt}.tar.gz"; tar xvf "${file%.txt}.tar.gz"; done
    pprof-merge cilium-bugtool*/cmd/pprof-cpu && mv merged.data cpu.pprof
    pprof-merge cilium-bugtool*/cmd/pprof-heap && mv merged.data heap.pprof

>     rm -rf cilium-bugtool* PodPeriodicCommand*

Reviewer: Do you need the `-f`?

.. _CLUSTERMESH_MOCK: https://github.com/cilium/scaffolding/tree/main/cmapisrv-mock
.. _CLUSTERMESH_WORKFLOW: https://github.com/cilium/cilium/blob/main/.github/workflows/scale-test-clustermesh.yaml
.. _EGW_MASQ_METRICS: https://github.com/cilium/cilium/blob/main/.github/actions/cl2-modules/egw/modules/masq-metrics.yaml
.. _EGW_WORKFLOW: https://github.com/cilium/cilium/blob/main/.github/workflows/scale-test-egw.yaml
.. _EXAMPLE_MONITOR: https://github.com/cilium/cilium/blob/main/.github/actions/cl2-modules/egw/prom-extra-podmons/podmonitor.yaml
.. _FQDN_PERF_WORKFLOW: https://github.com/cilium/cilium/blob/main/.github/workflows/fqdn-perf.yaml
.. _GSUTIL_INSTALL: https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/gsutil_install
.. _NETPOL_SCALE_TEST: https://github.com/cilium/cilium/tree/main/.github/actions/cl2-modules/netpol
.. _PERFDASH: https://github.com/cilium/scaffolding/tree/main/scale-tests
.. _PPROF_MERGE: https://github.com/rakyll/pprof-merge
.. _SCALE_100_WORKFLOW: https://github.com/cilium/cilium/blob/main/.github/workflows/scale-test-100-gce.yaml
.. _SLACK_CHANNEL: https://slack.cilium.io

> .. _TEST_RUN: https://github.com/cilium/cilium/actions/runs/14584355333

Reviewer: Please find another link here. This is a single workflow run, and the results and logs are not persistent over long durations (we keep them, what, three months?), which means that it will break in a few months at most.

You could point to the workflow runs list: https://github.com/cilium/cilium/actions/workflows/scale-test-100-gce.yaml and explain how do display results from there.
